{% blockquote Percy Bysshe Shelly, Ozymandias (1818) %}

…And on the pedestal these words appear: ‘My name is Ozymandias, king of
kings: Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!’ Nothing beside
remains. Round the decay Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare The
lone and level sands stretch far away.

{% endblockquote %}

As mentioned in the [About page]({{%20root_url%20}}/about) the name of
the blog comes from a passage in *The Sign of the Four* by Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle:

{% blockquote Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, The Sign of the Four (1890) %}
“Winwood Reade is good upon the subject,” said Holmes. “He remarks that,
while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the aggregate he
becomes a mathematical certainty. You can, for example, never foretell
what any one man will do, but you can say with precision what an average
number will be up to. Individuals vary, but percentages remain constant.
So says the statistician.” {% endblockquote %} <!-- more -->

Sherlock Holmes is referring to Winwood Reade’s [*The Martyrdom of
Man*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Winwood_Reade#The_Martyrdom_of_Man_.281872.29).
Apparently it was one of the most prominent books of the day - offering
a secular, [Freethinking](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freethought)
perspective on history.

The [full text](http://www.exclassics.com/martyrdom/mrtintro.htm) is
freely available at the wonderful
[exclassics.com](http://www.exclassics.com/) along with other forgotten
relics such as:

-   [*The Memoirs of Jozef Borowlaski, The Last Court
    Dwarf*](http://www.exclassics.com/dwarf/dwarfint.htm) - apparently
    he was sort of like a real-life Tyrion Lannister.
-   [*The History of King Richard the Third*, by Thomas
    More](http://www.exclassics.com/richard/richint.htm) - learn just
    *how* he ended up [beneath a Leicester car
    park!](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leicestershire-21063882)
-   [*English as She is Spoke*, by Pedro Carolino and Jose da
    Fonseca](http://www.exclassics.com/espoke/espkint.htm) - a
    Portuguese/English phrase book written by authors who knew no
    English and thus constructed the book by taking a Portuguese/French
    phrasebook and translating the French word for word into English
    using a dictionary. What could possibly go wrong? Well, here’s an
    example: {%blockquote %} **Very dissatisfied customer (brandishing
    pistol):** Here is a horse who have a bad looks. Give me another; I
    will not that. He not sall know to march, he is pursy, he is
    foundered. Don’t you are ashamed to give me a jade as like? he is
    undshoed, he is with nails up; it want to lead to the farrier.

**Terrified horse dealer:** Your pistols are its loads? {% endblockquote
%} One can only presume they went on to produce a [Hungarian
phrasebook](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirty_Hungarian_Phrasebook) and
[translate video
games](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_your_base_are_belong_to_us).

-   [*The Book of Household Management* by Mrs. Isabella
    Beeton](http://www.exclassics.com/beeton/beetintr.htm) - experience
    the Delia Smith of the Victorian era. Who can resist such delicious
    treats as [*Very Plain Bread
    Pudding*](http://www.exclassics.com/beeton/beet27.htm#P1251) or
    [*Useful Soup for Benevolent
    Purposes*](http://www.exclassics.com/beeton/beet6.htm#P165)!? She
    also makes the rather unlikely claim that: {% blockquote %} The
    shepherds of Egypt had a singular manner of cooking eggs without the
    aid of fire. They placed them in a sling, which they turned so
    rapidly that the friction of the air heated them to the exact point
    required for use. {% endblockquote %} Perhaps I’ll make a post
    calculating just how fast one would have to spin the sling…

